---
layout: post
title: How I used pants to trigger 60% fewer tests
date: 2025-02-02 15:09:00
description: 
tags:
  - software-engineering
  - pants
categories: 
featured: false
---
# TL;DR: 

- As codebases grow, so do the number of tests and the duration of your CI pipeline
- However, not every test needs to run for every small change
- [pants](https://www.pantsbuild.org/) is a build system that thrives at automatic dependency inference
- Because it infers dependencies, you can use it to only run the set of affected unit tests
	- This can make testing a lot more efficient
- I also used pants to debug some dependency issues and reduced the average number of tests triggered by 60%

#### How do tests get in the way of moving fast?

You decide as a team that tests are important. You don't want broken code. So you make it a habit to add unit tests whenever you add new code. Small pull requests are also important, as they get faster and better reviews, improve code quality, and are less likely to break things (take a look at this [article](https://www.swarmia.com/blog/why-small-pull-requests-are-better/)). Over time you develop a codebase that is robust and beautiful. But merging also takes longer because the suite of tests that need to be run before you can merge your code is much bigger! This can be frustrating as in many cases, you *know* what you wrote doesn't affect anything else in the codebase. 

"Come on, I just added a simple print statement. Why do I need to wait 30 minutes to merge this code?" - you, probably.

Well, pants is here to save you.

#### Let's put some pants on your CI pipeline

Beyond what you are hopefully wearing right now at work, pants also refers to a build system. As the [docs mention](https://www.pantsbuild.org/stable/docs/introduction/welcome-to-pants), it wraps many underlying tools - "compilers, code generators, dependency resolvers, test runners, linters, formatters, packagers, REPLs and more." You can read more about it, but the main thing we're going to focus on is its dependency inference capabilities and how that affects testing. 

**pants' dependency inference lets us run only affected tests.** On a very high level, pants knows which files are connected. It automatically scans through your imports and says "Hey, it looks like `test_foo.py` depends on `foo.py`". 

Using information like this, pants can run only the tests that are affected by changes you make in a new branch. The command looks like the following:

```bash
pants --changed-since=origin/main test
```

If you make changes to `foo.py` it might say: "Hey, I can see that in this new branch, the one file that changed compared to the `main` branch is `foo.py`. Since `test_foo.py` is the one test that depends on this, let's just run that test."

Now, consider the scenario where `bar.py` also depends on `foo.py`. It also has its own unit test `test_bar.py` that only imports from `bar.py`. When you change `foo.py` you want to ensure that `bar.py` also still works as expected i.e. you want `test_bar.py` to also run! `test_bar.py` is a *transitive* dependent. You can run the following command:

```bash
pants --changed-since=origin/main --changed-dependents=transitive test
```

Here, pants says "Hey, you changed `foo.py`, and I can see that `test_foo.py` as well as `test_bar.py` depend on `foo.py` directly and transitively, respectively. Let me run both unit tests."

The speed up that you can get from this depends on how many tests you have, and how long each one takes. As a toy example, let's say you have 100 independent modules, each with their own test that takes 1 second to run. In a new feature branch, you only change one of the modules. In this case, testing without pants would take 100 seconds, while testing with pants would take only 1 second.

#### How I used pants to reduce the average number of tests triggered by another 60%

In our case, we noticed a huge improvement to our testing times after the introduction of pants. Over time, however, I noticed that small changes in certain parts of the codebase were still triggering a whole swarm of tests. 

The approach outlined in the previous section is only as affective as your software design: for example, if all unit tests depend on a module `X` and this module `X` depends on all other parts of the codebase, you're back at square one: any change triggers all unit tests, so you don't get as much of a speed up as you would ideally have.

Thankfully, pants' `dependents` ([documentation](https://www.pantsbuild.org/dev/docs/using-pants/project-introspection#dependents---find-which-targets-depend-on-a-target)) and `paths` ([documentation](https://www.pantsbuild.org/dev/docs/using-pants/project-introspection#paths---find-dependency-paths)) commands are perfect for this scenario.

The `dependents` command shows you the list of files that depend on the file that you're inspecting. Since our testing is done with the `--transitive` flag, we use the same flag for this command as well.

```bash
pants dependents --transitive <file_name>
```

I picked a set of files that I knew were triggering unexpected tests, then filtered the outputs to only include test files.

```bash
pants dependents --transitive <file_name> | grep tests
```

This gave me a set of tests that I could inspect. Given these tests, I used the `paths` command to figure out the dependency path:

```bash
pants paths --from=<test_file> --to=<file_name>
```

In our case we got outputs like the following:

```bash
[
  [
    <test_file>,
    ...,
    /.../conftest.py,
    ...,
    <file_name>,
  ]
]
```

Aha! A `conftest.py` was importing a whole range of dependencies, and since all tests in the suite depend on `conftest.py` although they don't explicitly import from this file, `pants` was triggering a whole bunch of unrelated tests!

To solve this, I refactored our test modules to break apart this dependency. I figured out what fixtures from the `conftest.py` were needed in which tests, and put them in their respective tests. Interestingly enough, it was very rare for a fixture in `confest.py` to actually be needed across multiple tests.

**This fix reduced the average number of tests each file triggers by 60%**, a substantial improvement for us!
#### Conclusion
I've thoroughly enjoyed using pants as it allows us to do what is only necessary. We also use it for linting, formatting, and type checking only the files that are affected by any changes since the main branch. 

I think the commands that I've found the most useful for me are `dependents` and `dependencies`, as they can help you to understand the structure of your code a lot better, and possibly fix things if the structure doesn't meet your expectations e.g. "this module shouldn't depend on this!"

You can read more about some of the history of `pants` [here](https://earthly.dev/blog/pants-build/), and how to use it from the documentation [here](https://www.pantsbuild.org/stable/docs/introduction/welcome-to-pants).
